Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we
have an unusual type of episode.
I’m not going to talk about a
person’s life, a historical event,
or some other weird and wonderful
thing going on in the world.
Today, I’m going to talk to you about
how I choose, research, write and
produce podcast episodes, and how
this process has changed over the
past almost six years of doing so.
I’ve had quite a few requests for this
type of episode, and a few weeks ago,
I got it again from an interesting
Brazilian member called Itamar.
So, Itamar, and to everyone else
listening to this, I hope you’ll enjoy
this slightly meta type of episode.
I’m also going to share a bunch of
things I found out about the kind
of people who listen to this podcast
from a recent survey, so I think you
might find that interesting, too.
OK then, let’s get right into it.
Depending on the way you
calculate it, there are almost
5 million different podcasts.
Not individual podcast episodes; 5 million
podcasts, 5 million different shows.
As I’m sure you know, there are
podcasts about everything: comedy,
TV shows, business, football,
knitting, fishing, obscure historical
periods, and, lest I forget, podcasts
that help you learn a language.
English Learning for Curious
Minds–this podcast–is one of those.
Of course, it isn’t the only one.
There are tonnes of different podcasts
that help you learn English, and
they tend to follow similar formats.
Some are conversation-based, with
two teachers having a conversation
about anything from their personal
lives to a particular element
of English grammar or language.
Others might be one person giving
motivational advice, or giving
what’s essentially an English
lesson in an audio format.
This one is a little different.
My approach right from the start has
always been to present an interesting
and thought-provoking subject in a
way that allows you to learn English
through listening to the episode, and
allows you to learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as you improve your English.
This is now episode 565, so I have had
quite a bit of practice making them.
And in this meta episode, I’ll tell you
what I’ve learned and what the process
of making an episode looks like now.
So, let’s go back to the start.
When I first started, almost six
years ago now, I had absolutely
no idea what I was doing.
I had quite a good idea of what I wanted
the finished product to look like–a
15- to 20-minute episode that was both
interesting and helped people improve
their English–but I didn’t have much of
an idea about how to actually make one.
So…I just started, and figured
I’d make it up as I went along.
I chose some topics that I thought
might be interesting, I did a bunch
of research into them, and I pulled up
Google Docs and just started typing.
When I thought they were good
enough, I recorded them using a
microphone I borrowed from a friend.
Then I listened to them again
and…I thought they sounded awful.
Firstly, like most people, I really
didn’t like the sound of my own voice.
And secondly, I thought the content of
the episodes themselves sounded dull.
I wouldn’t want to listen to
them, so why should anyone else?
In fact, I never released
these early episodes.
They were on topics I now realise were
pretty difficult to make interesting in
an audio-only format: there was one on
how black holes work, and another one on
how the international bond market works.
Interesting and important subjects, sure,
but quite hard to turn into an interesting
topic for someone at B1 or B2 level.
So, I scrapped them - they simply
never saw the light of day.
I decided to choose some slightly easier
subjects to tackle, and things that I
was more familiar with, and got cracking.
That was in December 2019, coming
on 6 years ago now, and I have
just kept going, with a few changes
and improvements along the way.
So, how does it work now?
Well, first comes the idea for the topic.
If you are a seasoned listener to
this show, you’ll know that we’ve
covered a lot of different subjects.
There’s been everything from episodes
about the life of disappeared English
aristocrats through to stories about the
Vikings, how recycling works, conspiracies
from ancient times, the list goes on.
There are only really three things
that need to be true for me to decide
that they are worthy of an episode.
Firstly, I need to find
the subject interesting.
Whether that means it’s an interesting
story about a period of history,
about someone who lived a particularly
interesting or important life, or about
a particularly interesting concept,
it needs to be interesting to me.
Secondly, it shouldn’t be about current
affairs or a topic that will become
irrelevant in weeks or months to come.
My hope is that anyone can go through
our library of episodes and choose one
that we might have made several years
ago, but it will be just as relevant
today as it was when it was made.
So something like King Henry VIII
or Cleopatra - realistically,
that isn’t going to change much,
so it makes for a good candidate.
And thirdly, it shouldn’t be about a
highly controversial or divisive topic.
I try to be as apolitical as possible
in this show, within reason, and
there are some topics that I know
with complete certainty would end up
flooding my inbox with angry messages
on both sides of the argument.
I’m sure you can imagine what
might fit into that category.
There are a few other things I
take into consideration too, like
whether a story can be properly
told in an audio-only format.
Some, like if you are talking about
works of art or geographical borders,
just don’t work quite so well without
images, so I’ll also take that into
consideration, and that’s the reason
there aren’t many episodes about art.
We also now make one three-part
mini-series every month.
Sometimes these will be about three
different subjects that are all on
a similar theme, but sometimes there
will be a story that I just don’t
think can be properly told in a
single 20-minute episode, like the
one on the Cambridge Five spy ring.
This started as a standalone,
single episode, but I ended up
splitting it into three different
episodes, a three-part mini-series.
So, once a topic is chosen, what next?
Well, I’ll usually try to get as much of
an understanding of the story or the topic
as possible before writing anything down.
This might start with something as basic
as skimming over a Wikipedia entry to try
to get an overview of the topic, before
going into more detail about particular
events or parts of the story, reading
opinion pieces, downloading datasets and
trying to make sense of them, reading
books on the topic, it can be anything
that helps me understand the topic better.
Sometimes I start from a position of
relative knowledge, if I’m writing
about something I already know about.
I started this show while living in Malta.
I lived there for seven years and made
several episodes about things related
to Malta, so I was able to write most of
those without too much prior research.
And I’ll often make episodes about
people or historical events I’m already
reading about, so I’ll be reading a
book for fun, taking notes, and then
when it comes to writing the episode
of English Learning for Curious Minds,
I just refer back to my notes, and
the process is a whole lot simpler.
Once I feel relatively comfortable with
my own knowledge of the subject, I’ll
make a rough plan and start writing.
A rough plan for me is a very simple
collection of five or so bullet
points, with general ideas of how
I want the episode to develop.
Sometimes it’s easy, like if it’s about
the story of someone’s life, which
typically follows a chronological order,
but sometimes it’s harder, and it takes a
bit more time and thought to get it right.
Then, I start writing.
When I first started, I would write
out general bullet points rather than
the entire script, but when it came
to recording, I found this meant I
spent more time pausing and repeating
certain parts in a different way, so
now I write out the entire script,
and I simply read it out loud.
But I write as I speak, or at least I
try to, so my hope is for an episode
to sound more like a conversation,
more like natural speech, than a
formal written article read aloud.
As you can probably tell, I use a range
of different vocabulary and expressions.
There is no particular grand science
to this, but I try to use language that
someone at a B1 level could understand
at a bit of a stretch, language that
someone at a C1 level could understand
almost entirely, but that anyone
at B1 to C1 level will learn from.
This means not artificially dumbing down
my language or using simple terms, but I
might say something twice in two different
ways — first naturally, and then in
another, simpler way that will help you
understand if you didn’t the first time.
I speak more clearly than I would if
I were speaking to a native speaker,
and of course, I make sure that
all of the more complicated words
and phrases are clearly defined in
our transcripts and study packs.
There are around 100 of these advanced
words and phrases per episode, so that’s
more than 50,000 different definitions
created, and when you remove the
duplicates, the ones that have appeared
twice or more, there’s something like
20,000 B2 and above words that you’d
learn if you listened to every episode.
Now, in terms of length, I aim to
make each episode around 20 minutes
long, with some coming in slightly
under that and others a little over,
which means the script should be
between 2,500 and 3,000 words long.
I try to write the script in one go,
and this writing process typically
takes anywhere from two to five hours.
It’s rarely less than two, sometimes it
can be much more than 5, but it tends to
fall into that two-to-five-hour bracket.
Now, you might think this is quick,
or you might think it’s a long
time, but all I’ll say is that
it used to take me a lot longer.
After doing it 565 times and writing
well over a million words, I've had
quite a lot of practice, so it would
be strange if I hadn’t got quicker.
And this brings me on to
another important point.
At various points over the
years, I have tried a bunch of
things to speed up the process.
I've experimented with hiring external
scriptwriters to write episodes of
English Learning for Curious Minds.
I posted a job for this once and
got more than 500 applicants,
and I trialled 30 different ones.
Unfortunately–or perhaps fortunately–I
never managed to find someone who was
able to write to a level of quality
that I was happy with, and that I
felt was true to my voice and style,
the voice and style of this podcast.
In every case, when I would review the
script that they had written, I found
myself making so many edits and changes
to their drafts, and starting to record an
episode and realising that something they
had written didn’t sound like me, that I
realised it would have been quicker for
me to just write everything from scratch.
So that is now what I do: no external
scriptwriters, everything on this
show is written by me, Alastair.
I do, however, have another
scriptwriting colleague, in the
form of various AI models I use
to help me at different points in
the planning and writing process.
Specifically, I primarily use ChatGPT,
Claude and Grok, but I’ll sometimes
use other tools as well for a second
or third opinion on something.
During the planning stage, I will
often tell ChatGPT what my proposed
outline is, and ask it to point
out areas I hadn’t thought about.
If I get writer’s block, and I’m just
not sure where to go next in a script,
I might paste in what I’ve written
thus far and ask it to give me three
different routes to take it next.
I don’t always use what the AI suggests,
and if I do use them, I often find
myself having to rewrite much of
what ChatGPT provided, but they can
be useful for giving me a fresh idea
and helping me get back on track.
I have, by the way, tested multiple
times trying to get ChatGPT to
actually write episodes in my voice.
It does a better job than most of the
human scriptwriters I've previously
worked with, but it still sounds far
too artificial, too unlike me, so
I use it more as a sounding board,
an editor and a review tool rather
than a tool to write episode scripts.
Now, when I've finished the draft of an
episode, I’ll typically wait at least 24
hours, preferably more like two or three
days, and then I’ll return to the script.
I’ll review it myself, spend a couple
more hours making changes, and I’ll
also paste the entire thing into two or
three different AI tools and ask them
to do everything from fact-checking
to grammar checking, and to give
me feedback on the narrative arc,
things that I’ve missed, and so on.
I don’t always act on the feedback,
but it certainly is useful to have
it there as a second or even third
opinion, albeit a non-human one.
And then, once I am happy
with it, I’ll press record.
I almost always find something I’m unhappy
with during the recording process, so I
have to stop the recording and rewrite
that bit of the script before re-recording
it, but once that is done, my work with
the script is over, and it’s passed to
our audio editor before being passed
to our in-house teacher who creates
all the in-line vocabulary definitions,
and the accompanying study pack.
And…that, I guess, is it.
It isn’t a huge secret or special
sauce, but rather the product of
doing something more than 500 times.
Still, there are many times when I listen
to something again and think “eugh, I
should have said that in a different
way, or it would have been interesting
to have talked about x instead of y”.
I try not to listen to the episodes
again, because I know that if I did
this, I’d be constantly worrying
about going back to change certain
things, and that would mean that there
wasn’t any time for making new ones.
And I also now don’t really look too much
at how many people listened to certain
episodes, especially not on YouTube.
As you probably know, the algorithms on
tools like YouTube and Spotify tend to
gravitate towards clickbaity and extreme
titles and subjects, so that’s why you see
people making episodes about things like
“10 English Words You Have To Know Today!”
or “This Is Why You Can’t Speak English”.
I know that I don’t want to make
episodes about those sorts of things,
and if I did, it would attract the
wrong types of people to the show.
What’s more, I often receive emails from
people telling me how much they enjoyed
episodes that didn’t do nearly as well
in terms of downloads, so I now pay very
little attention to the download numbers.
What I do pay attention to,
however, is what you, the wonderful
listeners of this show and members
of Leonardo English, tell me.
So let me finish this slightly meta
episode by sharing some interesting
facts from this big survey that
hundreds of you were so kind
to fill out at the end of July.
So, the most popular countries
in terms of listeners are Spain,
China, Brazil, Italy and Germany.
Most listeners are over the age of 35.
69% of you say you listen for pleasure,
while 47% list work as a reason.
75% of you also read books in English, and
66% of you watch TV or films in English.
Only 12% of you go to an
English-language school.
71% of you listen to other English
podcasts–well done–and 65% of
you say your biggest challenge is
speaking fluently, no surprise there.
I asked for feedback on how
we could improve the show.
There were some wonderful suggestions, but
quite a few examples of the wide variety
of people who listen to this podcast,
and how you can’t please everyone.
A bunch of you said you wanted more
episodes about British society and
culture, and about the same number
of you said you wanted fewer.
Almost as many of you said you wanted
shorter episodes as said you wanted
longer episodes, and there were as many
of you who requested more complicated
vocabulary as those of you who said
you found it too hard to understand.
We will, most probably, introduce some
shorter episodes, and there are lots of
more specific pieces of feedback that I’ll
definitely be incorporating into the show,
but these are just a few examples of how
you can’t please everyone, and sometimes
how you have to just do what feels right…
And very interestingly, of those of you
who are members, 70% said you use your
membership either every day or several
times a week, which just goes to show that
it really is very useful to many of you.
So, there we go, a peek behind
the curtain, a look inside
how these episodes are made.
I get pretty regular emails from people
saying that they are thinking of starting
a similar type of podcast in Spanish
or French or Italian, and asking me
for “the secret sauce” of how to do it.
As you can see, there really
isn’t a secret, but it’s the
product of doing something pretty
much every day for five years.
If you are thinking of starting
a podcast like this in your own
language — whether it’s Spanish,
French, Chinese, whatever — my biggest
piece of advice is just to start.
Don’t worry if the first
episodes aren’t perfect.
As you now know, mine certainly weren’t.
And as a final thought, thank you
for listening, and an especially
big thank you to those of you who
are members or who have ever bought
a course or one of our products.
This show literally wouldn’t
be possible without you.
OK then, that’s it for this meta
episode on how I make podcast episodes.
I hope it was an interesting one,
that you learned something new,
and don’t worry, regular service
will resume from the next episode.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.